# AdventOfCode2020

Python code to solve daily puzzles of http://adventofcode.com/2020

Code is tested with Python 3.8.3 (Anaconda distribution) on Win10. Developed with VSCode.

## Days

* Day 1:  Use of itertools.combintations makes this one easy.  I got to it late (due to server crashes), but it took only a couple of minutes.
* Day 2:  Regex to parse the input string, then loop through and evaluate each item to meet the different password validity rules.  Fumbled around with the regex for a while, because I haven't used it recently.  Part 1: 00:23:47, rank 4973.  Part 2: 00:31:34, rank 4673.
* Day 3:  Count "trees" by walking through a 2D array with various "slopes".  Part 1: 00:06:25, rank 1123.  Part 2: 00:12:33, rank 1477.  Not sure if I could have done it much faster, although someone got part 1 in 35 seconds!
* Day 4:  Parse a document, separate into sets of key/value pairs, and then check the validity of each set (passport) against several rules.  I fumbled the initial parsing and had trouble figuring out the problem, which ended up being that I was forgetting to add in the last set at the end of the file.  Part 1: 00:42:40, rank 7447.  Part 2: 01:06:41, rank 4820.
* Day 5:  Part 1 was easy.  For part 2, find the missing seat, given a list of taken seats.  I ended up making a dict of (row,col) and the deleting the keys that were taken.  My time was a bit worse on part 2 because I accidentally didn't iterate over the right number (use a constant!).  Part 1:  00:12:22, rank 1811.  Part 2: 00:30:41, rank 3917.
* Day 6:  Used a dict to accumulate values, to help with uniqueness.  This was a bit more work in part 1, but made part 2 easier.  Part 1: 00:11:27, rank 4294.  Part 2: 00:18:48, rank 3392.
* Day 7:  This one had more typing.  Built a tree with nodes that contained pointers up and down.  Part 1 counted up the tree, and part 2 counted down the tree.  Part 1:  00:45:08, rank 4076.  Part 2: 00:55:52, rank 2981.
* Day 8:  List of operations that alter a state variable and an op pointer.  Classic AoC.  Took a bit to get the machinery in place.  Part 2 involved trying to find a single op that was corrupted and resulting in an infinite loop.  It took me a bit to realize that one could just brute force it... Just iterate through each line, alter it, re-try the program and stop if the program completes.  Part 1: 00:19:54, rank 5264.  Part 2: 00:41:43, rank 4602.
* Day 9:  Part 1 used itertools.permutations check for validity over a moving window of a list.  Part 2 iterated over the list again, to find a contiguous window that summed to a value.  Brute force seemed good enough.  Part 1: 00:12:09 rank 2879.  Part 2: 00:24:01 rank 3033.
* Day 10:  Part 1 was just calling the right numpy function (np.diff).  Part 2 required some thought!  And I ended up [needing help]( https://github.com/neelakantankk/Advent_of_Code_2020/blob/main/Day_10/day_10.py).  Part 1: 00:14:19, rank 4074.  Part 2: 22:18:43, rank 30446.
* Day 11:  A character matrix with rules to change the character state.  The rules involved looking at the neighbors at each character.  Part 2 gave it a twist by requiring looking an arbitrary distance in the eight directions.  Part 1: 00:44:00, rank 3824.  Part 2: 01:06:34, rank 3263.
* Day 12:  Movement on a grid based on commands, requiring left/right rotations.  Another classic AoC.  It would be useful to have the direction arrays and approach (x % y for list rotation) set up ahead of time.  Part 1: 00:32:03 rank 4441.  Part 2: 00:51:43 rank 3354.
* Day 13:  Modulo algebra!  Part 1 was straightforward, just had a cycle through a list.  Part 2 was quite a bit trickier.  I tried a brute-force solution, and ran it overnight (!) without it returning.  The insight (the next day) was that once one identified a time for a pair of buses, that pattern would repeat with the least common multiple of the pair.  So one could then take that aggregated cycle to match with another bus.  This completed successfully in 0.008 sec.  Part 1:  00:18:54, rank 4150.  Part 2: 16:27:24, rank 18332.
* Day 14:  Bit arithmetic!  Part 1 was straightforward (as usual?), with a computation of two masks (one to set bits and one to clear bits), and then the application over a list of numbers.  Part 2 had a twist (as usual?), with a varying set of bit positions that would have to be set to all possible values (i.e. sometimes two bits, 00 01 10 11, and sometimes more).  I solved that by using yet another bitmask, iterating from 0 to 2**n, and then setting/unsetting the particular bits based on this mask.  Part 1:  00:26:06, rank 2343.  Part 2: 01:08:23, rank 2796.  Honestly, it isn't a bad hour or so to put into this, and even if my times are not competitive, it is still a sense of satisfaction in figuring out the puzzle.
* Day 15:  A simple rules-based sequence, requiring the tracking of the last time a number was referenced.  Python made this easy, as one could use a dict to store and lookup the last time a value was used (rather than keeping track of the entire sequence).  Part 2 extended out to 30M turns, and my solution took 12.4 sec to run.  (I wonder if there was a cycle somewhere which would allow termination earlier?) This was also the first sub-1000 (leaderboard!) finish for me this year!  Part 1: 00:18:21 rank 1800, part 2: 00:20:21 rank 884.  
* Day 16:  Again with the iterating through a list checking values (in this case, a "ticket" consisting of another list!) against a set of rules.  The twist in Part 2 was to determine the critical rule for each position, i.e. which rule applied for all tickets at that position.  Lots of looping to one-by-one identify the rules.  I tripped for a while on Part 2 because I wasn't using the correct "invalid rule" check (a value could still be zero but with no rules applicable).  Hrmph.  Part 1: 00:23:51, rank 2629.  Part 2: 01:31:53, rank 3303.
* Day 17:  More Game-Of-Life-like iteration, but in three (part 1) or four (part 2) dimensions.  I was confused for a while because I didn't realize that the example was moving in space, so I was confused when my tests were not matching.  I simply had some indexing wrong, but I spent a lot of time trying to figure out if my understanding of the problem was correct.  I think that I had too many lines of code, so it was easy to make mistakes.  I was too tired to try to separate part 1 and part 2.  But, here it is.  Part 1: 01:24:02 rank 3521.  Part 2: 01:36:33 rank 3332.
* Day 18:  A little mathematical expression parser.  I [learned about parsing math statements](https://github.com/gnebehay/parser), in particular how to develop an abstract syntax tree for order-of-operations.  Part 1 required addition and multiplication to be at the same level.  By the time I figured it out and put the machinery in place, it was too late to do part 2 (which was addition to be higher priority than multiplication).  Part 1:  00:52:04 rank 2807.  Part 2:  23:29:19 rank 16723.
* Day 19:  Got part 1 after some trouble, and had to restructure completely for part 2.  (I needed to return and examine all possibilities.)  Part 1:  00:50:26 rank 1437.  Part 2:  >24hr  rank 15637.
* Day 20:  Arranging tiles together by matching borders (like a puzzle!).  The tiles can be rotated and flipped.  And then locate patterns in the resulting image.  Fun, for a while, but I got confused by the rotations and flipping, and this code should never be looked at by anyone ever.
* Day 21:  Sort and link foods - ingredients - allergens, to allow a back-elimination to figure out which ingredients have which allergen.  Some work, but got it.  After the last two failures, this was a nice win.  Part 1:  01:00:31 rank 2335.  Part 2:  01:21:53 rank 2465.
* Day 22:  The game of War, mostly.  Part 1 was simple, part 2 was also straightforward even though it involved recursion, checking/storing state, and other messy details.  Part 1:  00:31:31  rank 3343.  Part 2:  01:35:21  rank 2714.
* Day 23:  Moving objects around a ring.  At first I used a deque, and this was great for Part 1.  But Part 2 made the ring 1M, with 10M moves, and the deque (with its lovely rotate function) just didn't scale.  A different approach was to use a dict with each key pointing to the next entry in the ring.  So the moves were cheap (just changing the pointer values), and the search for the destination location was relatively cheap too (since a dict is hashed).  Part 1:  00:36:19 rank 1367.  Part 2:  02:00:05  rank 1451.
* Day 24:  Game of life (part 2) on a hex grid!  I remember hex grids from [2017 day 11](https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2017) and as before, a quick review of [Red Blob Games](https://www.redblobgames.com/grids/hexagons/#coordinates) was very useful.  Part 1:  00:47:34 rank 2627.  Part 2:  01:06:26  rank 1932.
* Day 25:  Straightforward encryption-like thing.  But part 2 requires that I have the rest done!  Part 1:  00:15:10 rank 920.  Part 2:  02:25:19 rank 3454.





## See previous work at:
* https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2015
* https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2016
* https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2017
* https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2018
* https://github.com/jborlik/AdventOfCode2019
